New guide: How to use function calling with chat models in Vellum (#255)
vellum-ai/vellum-client-generator: fern/docs/content/help/workflows/function-calling.mdx

---
title: Function Calling with Chat Models in Vellum
description: Learn how to use function calling with Chat Models in Vellum Workflows
---

Function calling (aka “tool calling”) helps you get consistent structured data from LLMs. It lets you call custom functions, interact with external APIs, and generally turn natural language into something code can understand.

But, don't be misled by the name—this feature doesn't _actually_ call functions for you.

Instead, it creates a JSON object with the name of the function to call and the arguments to pass, which you can use to trigger functions in your code. OpenAI models generate this JSON based on the tools you define with the [tools parameter](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat/create#chat/create-functions) in the API.

So now that we’ve cleared that part, let’s learn _how you can use function calling with Chat Models in Vellum._

# Using Function Calling in Vellum

In this tutorial, we cover how function calling works and how to use it in Vellum Workflows:

By the end of this tutorial, you'll learn to do four tasks in Vellum:

> - `Define function calls` in a Prompt Node within Workflows;

Reviewer: nit: I'd use italics to draw emphase on something, and inline code blocks for actual code, field names, etc.

- Enable your models to `auto-select or enforce the execution` of a function response;
- Pass `Function Call outputs` from a Workflow to your code;
- `Run functions` with the provided arguments.

<Callout intent="info">
  💡 Keep in mind that although we’ll run *some arbitrary functions* to close
  the response loop, we won't go into much detail on how to call external APIs
  using the generated arguments.
</Callout>

## Outline

For this tutorial, we’ll create an AI-powered customer chatbot for a smartphone outlet, that will have two tools (or functions) defined:

- `delivery_data`
  - This function will require three parameters: `Phone`, which returns the phone's name, `Location`, which returns the user's location, and `Condition`, which returns the phone's condition.
- `call_agent`
  - This one accepts one parameter: `Question` which is the user's query.

<Callout intent="info">
  💡 This tutorial demonstrates how to define function calling messages in

>   Prompt Nodes within Workflows. However, they can also be configured in your
>   Prompt Variants in your Prompt Sandbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Prompt Nodes within Workflows. However, they can also be configured in 
  Prompt Variants within a Prompt Sandbox.
```

</Callout>

## Step 1: Setting up Messages and Conversation History

To setup an OpenAI API call in Vellum, we’ll be using a `Prompt Node`. This node enables the configuration of all parameters required for an OpenAI API call.

We begin by adding the Prompt Node in the Workflow:

![Add Prompt Node](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/prompt-node.png)

To edit the Prompt Node, just click on the “expand” icon like on the image above.

Now let’s set up the messages.

### System Message

First we’ll start by adding a `system message` that tells the model to classify user intents. These models can hallucinate, so we’ll explicitly tell the model to ask for clarification if there's incomplete information. Here’s the system message we used:

<Callout intent="info">
  💬 You're great at classifying user intents. Don't assume which values to use
  in functions—ask for clarification if needed.
</Callout>

### User Message

Next, we'll create a dynamic variable `msg` , and add it in the `user message` to ensure it automatically updates with the variable's content.

> Here’s how the Prompt Node looks like once we added the System and the User message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s what the Prompt Node looks like once we've added the System and the User message:
```

![Prompt Node Setup](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/prompt-node-setup.png)

### Chat Mode

To use function calling with Chat Models, you first need to set up three things in the Prompt Node:

> 1. **$chat_history variable**: Simply click on `Add Variable` and write `$chat_history`

Reviewer: Formatting is wonky here

2. **Chat generation model**: Click on the model dropdown and select the latest GPT-4 turbo model, or `GPT-4 Turbo 04/09/2024`
3. **$chat_history block**: Click on the “Add” dropdown on the right, and select “Add Chat History”

> Here’s how the final setup should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s what the prompt should look like after you've completed the final step:
```

![Prompt Node With Chat History](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/prompt-node-chat-history.png)

Now let’s set up the functions.

## Step 2: Defining Function Calls

To include a `Function` block, simply select it from the "Add" dropdown menu. Once added, you’ll notice a grayed out box that says “todo”:

![Add Function](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/add-function.png)

> When you click that box, you can change the function's name and add custom description and parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you click that box, you can change the function's name and add a custom description and parameters:
```

![Edit Function](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/edit-function.png)

> You'll notice there are two options available to define these functions: `Form` and `Upload`. The `Form` option allows you to define your function calling message using the UI, while the `Upload` option enables you to upload a JSON or YAML file. The uploaded file will automatically map its values to the fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll notice there are two options available to define these functions: `Form` and `Upload`. The `Form` option allows you to define your function calling message using the UI, while the `Upload` option enables you to upload a JSON or YAML file. The uploaded file will automatically map its values to the fields.

You might upload a file if you already have your functions defined in in your codebase and want to track their source of truth there.
```

![Prompt Node Function Called](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/prompt-node-response.png)

Next, you’ll probably want to pass these values directly to your code. Let’s learn how to do that in the next section.

## Step 4: Pass standardized Function Call outputs to your code

To ensure consistent output across different models, you can use Vellum’s standardized `Function Call` output type.

To do this, you need to add a Templating Node that receives _all model outputs,_ and extracts a specific one.

In our case, we add a Templating Node, where we extract the Prompt Node’s outputs as an `Array`, and we set the output type to be a `Function Call`:

![Extract Function from Templating Node](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/template-node.png)

Finally, you can add a `Final Output` node to pass the function call into your code.

> Here’s how the final Workflow looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s what the final Workflow looks like:
```

![Final Workflow](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/final-workflow.png)

And here’s the raw format from the Final Output node:

```jsx
{"state":"FULFILLED","arguments":{"type":"new","phone":"iPhone 15 Pro","location":"San Diego"},"id":"call_2wVIb9fBFDYh5rPP6QOOemok","name":"delivery_data"}
```

This is beneficial if you want your Workflow to _exclusively_ produce function call responses. But in real situations, you might have a Workflow that should generate _both Assistant and Function call outputs._

Let’s look at how you can conditionally branch out those outputs with Vellum.

## Step 4: Branching out Prompt Node Outputs

To branch out the model's responses, you’ll first need to add a **`Templating Node`** and extract the _output type_ from the Prompt Node:

![Extract Output Type Templating Node](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/branching-template-node.png)

Next, you’ll add a Conditional Node, where you’ll verify if the output type is a `FUNCTION_CALL`. If it is, you can divert to the function calling flow; otherwise, proceed with the alternative path.

> Here’s how the setup should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s what the setup should look like:
```

![Full Workflow Diagram](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/full-workflow.png)

You can now deploy your Workflow in your code.

Once deployed, you’ll need to invoke it using two input variables:

- `chat_history` – `CHAT_HISTORY`
- `user` – `STRING`

And the API call will return, two output variables:

- `function_call` – `FUNCTION_CALL`
- `answer` – `STRING`

## Step 5: Adding arbitrary functions

To showcase how this Workflow works, in our code, we wrote arbitrary functions that will print some static messages once the model passes the required parameters.

For the `delivery_data` function we’ll retrieve static message:

<Callout intent="info">
  💬 For delivery options in San Diego: You can get same-day delivery if you
  order before noon, with deliveries happening between 1:00 PM and 8:00 PM. If
  you miss the deadline, don't worry! You can still get your order the next day
  if you place it after noon, with deliveries scheduled between 10:00 AM and
  6:00 PM.
</Callout>

For the `call_agent` function we send another static message:

<Callout intent="info">
  💬 Please wait until I connect you with an agent…
</Callout>

> This is how our code looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what our code looks like:
```

        return "Please wait until I connect you with an agent…"
    else:
        return "unknown operation"
```

## Step 6: Testing the workflow

Now, let’s see how this works!

### **Case 1: Ask incomplete delivery questions**

Works as intended, the model asks about the other required parameter: `_location_`.

![Test Case 1](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/test-chat-1.png)

### **Case 2: Closing the loop, Call the `delivery_data` function**

Works as intended; the model provides the arbitrary answer we added in our function for the `delivery_data` function:

![Test Case 2](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/test-chat-2.png)

### **Case 3: Ask other questions**

The model accurately follows the instructions and asks the user if they want to be connected with an agent:

![Test Case 3](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/test-chat-3.png)

### **Case 4: Call the call_agent function if user says yes**

The model successfully runs the `call_agent` function and outputs the arbitrary answer we defined:

> ![Test Case 4](https://storage.googleapis.com/vellum-public/help-docs/function-calling-in-workflows/test-chat-4.png)

Reviewer: It would be great to end with some recap/conclusion here. For example,

```
## Conclusion
Hopefully through this guide you learned how to _________
```
